[DataGrid] Make possible to memoize rows and cells (#7846)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/data-grid/performance/performance.md

# Data Grid - Performance

<p class="description">Improve the performance of the DataGrid using the recommendations from this guide.</p>

## Memoize inner components with `React.memo`

The `DataGrid` component is composed of a central state object where all data is stored.
When an API method is called, a prop changes, or the user interacts with the UI (e.g. filtering a column), this state object is updated with the changes made.
To reflect the changes in the interface, the component must re-render.

> Since the state behaves like `React.useState`, it means that the `DataGrid` component will re-render as well as its children, which includes column headers, rows and cells.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the state behaves like `React.useState`, the `DataGrid` component will re-render its children, including column headers, rows, and cells.
```
To keep it shorter

> With smaller datasets, this is not a problem for concern, but it can become a bottleneck if the number of rows gets increased and, specially, if many columns render [custom content](/x/react-data-grid/column-definition/#rendering-cells).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With smaller datasets, this is not a problem for concern, but it can become a bottleneck if the number of rows increases, especially if many columns render [custom content](/x/react-data-grid/column-definition/#rendering-cells).
```

> One way to overcome this issue is using `React.memo` to only re-render the children components when their props have changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to overcome this issue is using `React.memo` to only re-render the child components when their props have changed.
```

To start using memoization, import the inner components, then pass their memoized version to the respective slots, as follow:

```tsx
import {
  GridRow,
  DataGrid, // or DataGridPro, DataGridPremium

>   DataGridColumnHeaders, // or DataGridProColumnHeaders, DataGridPremiumColumnHeaders

Reviewer: Side note: This seems inconsistent with the other components' names that do not change regardless of the package used (one exception is `DataGrid`/`DataGridPro`/`DataGridPremium`).
Should we rename it to `GridColumnHeaders` for all packages?

} from '@mui/x-data-grid';

const MemoizedRow = React.memo(GridRow);
const MemoizedColumnHeaders = React.memo(GridColumnHeaders);

<DataGrid
  slots={{
    row: MemoizedRow,
    columnHeaders: MemoizedColumnHeaders,
  }}
/>;
```

The following demo show this trick in action.
It also contains additional logic to highlight the components when they re-render.

{{"demo": "GridWithReactMemo.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

:::warning
We do not ship the components above already wrapped with `React.memo` because if you have rows whose cells display custom content not derived from the received props, e.g. selectors, these cells may display outdated information.

> If you define a column with a custom cell renderer where content comes from a [selector](/x/react-data-grid/state/#catalog-of-selectors) that changes more often then the props passed to `GridRow`, the row component should not be memoized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you define a column with a custom cell renderer where content comes from a [selector](/x/react-data-grid/state/#catalog-of-selectors) that changes more often than the props passed to `GridRow`, the row component should not be memoized.
```

With smaller datasets, this is not a problem for concern, but it can become a bottleneck if the number of rows gets increased and, specially, if many columns render [custom content](/x/react-data-grid/column-definition/#rendering-cells).
One way to overcome this issue is using `React.memo` to only re-render the children components when their props have changed.
To start using memoization, import the inner components, then pass their memoized version to the respective slots, as follow:

```tsx
import {
  GridRow,
  GridCell,
  DataGrid, // or DataGridPro, DataGridPremium
  DataGridColumnHeaders, // or DataGridProColumnHeaders, DataGridPremiumColumnHeaders
} from '@mui/x-data-grid';

const MemoizedRow = React.memo(GridRow);
const MemoizedCell = React.memo(GridCell);
const MemoizedColumnHeaders = React.memo(DataGridColumnHeaders);

<DataGrid
  components={{
    Row: MemoizedRow,
    Cell: MemoizedCell,
    ColumnHeaders: MemoizedColumnHeaders,
  }}
/>;
```

The following demo show this trick in action.
It also contains additional logic to highlight the components when they re-render.

{{"demo": "GridWithReactMemo.js", "bg": "inline", "defaultCodeOpen": false}}

:::warning

> We do not ship the components above already wrapped with `React.memo` because if you have cells that display custom content whose source is not the received props, these cells may display outdated information.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we memoize the `Cell` slot though?
`renderCell` is called in `GridRow` component and the returned value is passed to the `GridCell`.
So if there's `renderCell` in the column - the cell will always rerender - see this demo: https://codesandbox.io/s/dreamy-roentgen-px945x

> We do not ship the components above already wrapped with `React.memo` because if you have cells that display custom content whose source is not the received props, these cells may display outdated information.

Reviewer: By the way, is there a way to reduce rerenders of the cells that have `renderCell`? Would memoizing the component returned by `renderCell` work?
